writing a book is a process that builds on the work of many, with the help of many.
My helpers, collaborators, and supporters include. Editors Ellen Hoffman, Ann Rosenfeld,
and Maureen Mylander, who helped me at various times translate my academic ideas into prose,
editor Margaret Zusske, who saw this as a book needing to be published, and friends Susan Tolchin,
who spent hours helping me write my original proposal and continually urged me to complete
this project, even reading an entire draft students who tested my work by developing their own
studies colleagues who supported and encouraged my professional goals, friend and colleagues
who ems Mock, who helped me in the initial conceptualization of the transition model,
Joanne Harris-Bolzby and Steve Schlossberg, who read a draft and gave me words of encouragement
as well as suggestions Betty Bowers, secretary and friend, who helps in countless ways,
the most important of which is the commitment she shows, to my various projects, and Patricia Baker,
who patiently typed the early drafts of my friends, who support me as I cope with personal
and professional transitions. My husband, Steve, and children, Karen and Mark, with whom I share
intimately the joys and sorrows that are part of the adult years, my father, Saul Kamen, who inspired
me all my life and inspires me still even though his life has ended and the many people who have
shared their life stories with me, showing their enormous resources to manage change and teaching
me that the best is yet to be. A woman finds a great job in the city where her lover lives.
A year after she relocates she wonders, why am I so depressed? After being forced to retire,
a man feels his life lacks purpose. Angry at the company and himself, he keeps asking,
is this all there is? I'm a dumpie, says a woman whose husband of 35 years left her for another
woman. I feel like a discarded rag. How will I ever get my life back together? A young man gently
cradling his exhausted wife in the delivery room tells her, he's perfect, he's ours, we're a family
at last. How will I construct a life without Al? After 50 years of marriage, he was my life, even
after two years of being with owed, Marge cannot regain her sense of joy and purpose. Wherever I go,
I hear stories of change. All of us face transitions or turning points in our lives. How we handle these
journeys, live through them, and learn from them is what this book is about. Several years ago,
my husband and I decided that it was time to leave our home city of Detroit. We planned the move
carefully and managed to find jobs in another city where we had friends, colleagues, and children as
stabilizing elements. Yet I was depressed for two years after moving. Why wasn't I weathering this
change I had sought? Why was it so hard? This experience prompted me to remember many other
changes I had experienced in the past. I found it perplexing that in some instances I had coped
successfully and felt like the rocker Gibraltar, while in others I had felt as if I were my shatter.
As I thought about other people who had experienced transitions like retirement,
job change, and family change, I realized that I had also reacted differently, over time, to the
same kinds of transitions. I began to search for ways to make sense out of how people cope with
life's ups and downs. I asked my close friend, an expert researcher, whether it was possible to
develop a system that would be helpful to people in any kind of transition. My friend suggested a
way to start. List all the factors that could possibly make a difference in how one copes with
change. This list became the basis for my studies of people. In transition, with different colleagues,
I studied the experiences of people who were going through different types of transitions.
Men whose jobs had been eliminated, clerical workers who faced job and family changes,
adult learners who were returning to school, couples who had moved geographically, and adults
who were caring for aging parents. As a result of these studies, and others designed by scholars
studying the adult years, I developed a structured approach that is intended to extend the ways people
handle transitions and provide a roadmap for managing any change. This is where you come in.
Are you thinking about changing jobs, partners, or lifestyles? Are you upset by changes you don't
expect or want? Have you learned the hard way that times of transition are some of the most
difficult in life? Are you excited about the possibility of a new relationship? Are you
wondering whether to take early retirement, do you really believe that adjustment to new conditions,
good or bad, can be very difficult? Are you overwhelmed? If the answer is yes, this book can
be of special help to you. It provides not just text, not just a theory, but an organized series
of activities to help you gain control of your life. That means acquiring a new perspective on
transitions and developing strategies for dealing with them. Overwhelmed? Coping with life, s-ups,
and downs is a self-help book. But it's unlike any you've ever read. It won't tell you how to
fix old houses, flabby thighs, shaky bank accounts, or a turbulent love life. It doesn't promise
spectacular results in 10 minutes or even 10 days. What it does do is offer a way to think
about some of the most challenging issues you now face and are likely to encounter in the years to
come. In a nutshell, it tells you how to cope more effectively with the important changes in your life.
I call these changes transitions. Transitions are the changes, good or bad, expected or unexpected,
that unsettle our lives, shake us up, and take some adjusting over time. They can be prompted by a
host of incidents, a move to a new city, a lost promotion, a new baby, the death of someone close,
a financial windfall, an incapacitating AC knot. Sident or illness? These are things that can and
do happen to everyone, male or female, rich or poor, young or old, black or white. Yet surprisingly,
most people understand very little about transitions or how to manage them creatively.
If someone asked you to run in a marathon tomorrow, you'd probably laugh in disbelief,
even if you're a serious jogger. You may be fit, but you're not that fit. A long, gruelling race
requires special skills and strengths that you don't yet have, that you know can only be acquired
Yet everyday people face transitions in their lives that are as taxing psychologically as
marathons are physically. And they do this with little or no training or preparation.
Small wonder they're often exhausted and overwhelmed. This need not be. I believe that
people can become mentally fit, just as they can become physically fit. They can learn to meet the
challenge of difficult transitions with grace, skill, and mastery, just as well-trained athletes
meet extreme physical challenges. People train for sports by developing and following a rational
plan of action. First, they figure out the level of challenge they're trying to meet. Next, they
size up their particular areas of strength and weakness as they try to work toward that goal.
One person may get easily winded, another's thighs or feet may give out first. Then they develop a
strategy, a personalized training plan, to help them building up their net abilities so they're
better organized to meet the challenge and prepare for future demands. I believe that people can get
in shape for transitions by following the same rational principles used in sports training.
And I'm convinced that even someone already in the beginning or middle of a transition,
someone already running in a race with little or no preparation, can learn to handle it better.
That's why I wrote a book about mastering change. In it I present a systematic way of approaching
t-a-k-i-n-g stock and taking charge of a transition, any transition, so you can master it.
The chart that. The end of this introduction, Your Steps in Mastering Change, summarizes these steps.
As you will see, the book is organized around these steps. Part 1, approaching change,
enables you to look at your particular transition. Part 2, taking stock, details how to assess your
resources for coping, what I call your 4 S's. Part 3 suggests a procedure for, taking charge,
and profiting from change. Cases of actual people are used throughout the book to illustrate the
system and how you can make it work for any situation, retirement, a major move, any kind
of change. You can diagnose your coping resources and assess whether your balance of resources at
this time makes the possibility of your changing look good. If there are too many negatives,
then you can introduce some strategies to strengthen your coping resources,
enabling you to initiate the change at a more appropriate time. If you're weathering change,
you can go through the same process, assess your coping resources, see what needs bolstering,
and then use your coping strategies to help you weather this difficult time with more options,
understanding, and control. But, you may rightfully ask, what difference does this book make to me?
What will I gain by reading it? First, I have chosen to examine and write about what is common.
To all adults, the fact that they experience transitions, what those transitions are,
and how they change our lives. We cannot predict when someone will marry, divorce,
retire, or return to school, but we can say with certainty that all of us will experience
and probably require some help in getting through transitions. Second, having explored the
commonalities and the differences in many types of transitions, I offer a method for coping the
change systematically. That means all changes. This is not a one-solution recipe for change,
but rather a method of arriving at the solution that is appropriate for you. Third, this book
integrates what is known from scholars and researchers into an understandable, practical
package without requiring the reader to wade through many pages of technical jargon. Fourth,
this is not an, instead of, book. It is not a substitute for seeking professional help from a
counselor, psychologist, social worker, psychiatrist, psychoanalyst, or member of the clergy. I believe
that there are situations in which we do need professional help, and reading this book may
assist you to decide for yourself if and when is necessary. Fifth, the case histories, really
stories, generously distributed throughout the book will show you how others handle the problems,
challenges, and opportunities associated with change. You may not find a case that is the
mirror image of your own, but you can gain confidence and competence as a result of these
stories. You will begin to see that there is a structure for dealing with any life change.
You will learn how to identify the many different types of transitions that surface, predictably or
unexpectedly, a crucial step toward your goal of taking control and profiting from change.
The transition process and underlying assumption of my approach in this book is that we all face
many turning points for our life. My assumption that a particular change, such as being divorced,
becoming a grandparent, or retiring, is not necessarily related to chronological age runs
counter to much of the popular literature on adult development that uses metaphors like passages,
steps, and seasons. I believe the metaphor that best describes the adult years is the fan.
The fan illustrates the growing differences among individuals as they mature. Bernice Newvertham,
the psychologist who first brought national attention to the richness and complexities
of the adult years, suggests that if you compare a group of six-year-olds with a group of 60-year-olds,
the 60-year-olds will be the more diverse and heterogeneous. Why? Because with each year and
decade, there is a fanning out process resulting from the many different paths, experiences,
and choices people make.1 Despite what we know about the adult years, the media often reinforce
the metaphors of passages and stages by devoting at and not teem to those persons who jettison
their families and jobs for fulfillment as artists, writers, or wanderers in midlife.
But personally and professionally, I am uncomfortable with theories that suggest that a
midlife crisis is somehow implanted in the human psyche. Those theories give short shrift to the
immense variety of other transitions that can affect us at any age. Less romantic are the
data that show that midlife does not have a come-on in the crisis market. In fact, sociologists Leonard
Perlin and Morton Lieberman found that young adults experience more transitions, turning points,
and crises in a more concentrated period of time than people of any other age.2 After all,
many in that age group are establishing careers, attempting to form intimate relationships,
and moving from the biological families to start families of their own. Yet, we seem to read in
here more often about midlife men and women popping megadoses of tranquilizers in an attempt to cope
with the empty nest, returning to the empty nest, or feeling that their time is running out. If
there were one word I could use to describe adults, it would be variability. There are grandparents
of 40 and 80, first-time parents at 20 and 40, newly divorced people at 20 and 60. There are new
loves and increased sexual activity at 40, 60, and 80. There are nearly as many patterns as there
are people. In a recent class 1 asked my students for personal examples of variability. As they
eagerly reported their unusual situations, we began to think we could produce an issue of true
story. Among the milder stories were the following. A student reported that when she was 20 and her
mother 40, they had both had new babies. It felt strange to her to have her mother in the same boat
as she was. A student of 30 reported that her father of 55 had married an 18-year-old high school
graduate. Her attitude toward her father's new wife was very confused. The wife was more like
a stepdaughter than a stepmother. A student reported that his father had eloped with a woman the same
week that his fiance's daughter, his stepdaughter-to-be, had eloped. We can probably all agree that though it
is tempting to categorize adults, it is not really possible. The differences, the rest of the story,
the fluidity of life, the variability of experiences, and the heterogeneity among
adults make it impossible. It would, of course, be comforting if we could predict the crises or
transitions that go along with each year of our lives. But that is impossible. One day at lunch
I was talking with a friend whose parents had both died by the time she was 36. She said,
The death of my second parent created an enormous change for me. It changed the way I saw myself in
life. Others react similarly when their last parent dies. What is significant here is that the death
of a parent sets off a reaction of feelings and needs that emerge regardless of whether the adult
child is 20 or 40 or 60. But what we know is that each person experiences many transitions,
many crises. Let's start our understanding of change with some definitions. Transitions,
a definition when we think about transitions in our lives, the ones most likely to come to mind are
the note-worthy events that happen to us, expectedly or unexpectedly, like having a baby, being promoted,
or losing a job. But some equally important transitions stem from non-events, the things we
expect and hope for that somehow fail to happen, such as not being able to have a baby or not
getting a promotion. Both kinds of transitions can bring considerable change. The significance of the
event or non-event lies in how and to what extent it alters our lives. Here are some clues to search
for in determining the significance of a particular transition. It can change your roles. You have a
baby and suddenly you become a parent. You change jobs and you take on a whole new set of responsibilities.
It can change your relationships. Being a parent puts you in touch with new people, as does a new
job. Both experiences may also transform your existing relationships. It can change your routines.
A new baby alters living and sleeping habits. A new job may require a shift in schedule and in
commuting patterns. It can also affect your assumptions about yourself and the world. A new
father discovers he's more protective and respond. Simpler than you thought he would be, a person in
a new secretarial position may discover personal strengths and weaknesses that went unrecognized
in the old Clark typist job. If a transition is major, it will change all four aspects of your life,
your roles, relationships, routines, and assumptions. If it changes only one or two,
it is still a transition, but clearly one of less magnitude. The same type of transition, such as
retirement, can affect people in very different ways. One person may view it as a very positive
change, the gateway to a new career or a new life of leisure. Another may view it as a very negative
one, a one-way ticket to limbo. Further, what appears to be the same transition may be a major
trauma for one person but a minor problem for another. Consider, for example, the lives of two
clerical workers, Adrienne and Bette, each of whom was responsible for caring for an aging parent.
For Adrienne, almost everything in her life was altered after her mother, already frail,
broke her hip. She had always been dependent on her mother, but now her mother depended on her,
Adrienne's role had changed. Her relationships with her own family were changing as well.
She had little time for her husband. And children since so much of her time was spent caring for
her mother. Her routines were clearly changed. Instead of going home after work, she went right
to her mother's house, where she spent almost six hours each day until her brother came to
relieve her. Only her assumptions about herself were unaltered. She had always considered herself
a devoted daughter, and caring for her mother now was consistent with that image. Bette,
also a devoted daughter, was faced with an apparently similar situation, but in her case
it was quite different. In Bette's family, her sister was the main caretaker. Her mother and
sister both felt that Bette should do more, but she had small children and refused to disrupt her
own family. So although her role in her routines were not upset nearly as much as Adrienne's were,
assumptions about herself were much more in flux. She felt guilty much of the time.
The outward transition may look the same, but only the person involved can define whether the
transition is positive or negative and how it has altered his or her life. Even a positive and not
redistructive transition requires a period of adjustment. Tran not. Sessions that alter life
severely clearly demand even more adjustment and possibly more attention. This is especially true
if the affected person perceives that transition in terms of extreme hardship. Today is not forever,
although the onset of a transition may be linked to one identifiable event, transitions take time.
Six months, a year, sometimes two years pass before one moves fully through a major transition.
Realizing this makes it possible to be kinder to oneself while stumbling through the process
and kinder and more understanding to friends who have difficulty coping with change. Often our
first reaction to a transition is extreme, possibly very emotional. Have you ever been jilted? I have.
The day of the big jilt, I was devastated and thought I would never recover. Within a year,
I was happily involved with someone new. I have interviewed men who lost their jobs because of a
plant closing. They, too, felt that they would never recover. One said, I feel as if I have been
hit on the head and kicked in the back. I will never get over it. But six months later he was in
a new job and could joke about his earlier desperation. Not all transitions end so clearly
or so well, however. Another man in this group who failed to find another job so quickly was still at
C6 months. After the layoff point three, at first you are consumed by the change, preoccupied with
thinking and often talking about it. Then there is a middle period of disruption and searching in
which old roles and routines change and new ones evolve. This betwixt and between period is one of
great vulnerability. You're likely to be confused about what to do. Next, how to behave. Tiny details
can become problematic. If, for example, you have just moved in with someone, it takes a while to
know where the dishes and glasses are stored. But more important, it takes a while to feel comfortable
rearranging them. Finally, when you've finished the transition, the change has become integrated
into your life, for better or worse. You've accommodated to your new job, city or relationship.
Time transforms some bad events, but it also alters good ones. One day you marry the person of your
dreams or connect with the love of your life and decide to move in together. You think, I will always
feel like this. Nothing will ever come between us. Yet a few months or years later you may have a
major blow up and wonder what you ever saw in this person. In order to illustrate the different ways
transitions can change lives, I will relate the stories of three people I know. Carolyn, a newly
wed, Cathy, one of the first women appointed to a highly responsible executive position, and myself,
moving our family from the home we'd lived in for 15 years into a condominium apartment. First, the
story of Carolyn. Carolyn the newlywed in fairy tales, princesses marry princes, ride off into
the sunset and live happily ever after. In real life, even if people do manage to live happily,
it can take quite a bit of adjusting to get to ever after. Carolyn, for example, married her high
school sweetheart and moved with him from Cleveland into a small town. When we interviewed her right
after her move, the newlywed said, if you had a 10 point scale and 10 was miserable, I'd be off the
scale. Back home she had been part of a tightly knit religious group and had had the support of
many close friends and relatives. In her new community she felt isolated. Her husband needed
the car to go to work and lacking convenient transportation, Carolyn stayed in their apartment
without friends or support. To add to her dismay during this lonely period, she had the discomfort
and disappointment of a tubular pregnancy. In an interview six months later, Carolyn sounded very
different. She had worked to overcome her isolation and was making some headway. After
negotiating the use of the car, she joined a religious group similar to the one at home and
even started a newcomers club. She had also arranged regular phone chats with family and friends in her
old community. I'd still rather be back home, she said, but she no longer felt like a complete
outsider and was beginning to build a new circle of friends. Carolyn's story shows us that when
you reflect on how you felt at the beginning of a transition and compare it with your feelings about
it later, it's evident that a transition does not happen only at one given point in time. Rather,
it is a process, an episode with a beginning, a middle, and usually an end. And all through the
transition, your reactions and emotions continue to change as you integrate the event or non-event
into your life. Cathy the executive considered the example of Cathy, who was recently promoted
to top executive position, one of the first women to fill this role. At first, the newsbook articles
about her thrilled Cathy and her fam not. Al y, she could think of nothing else. But now that she
has been in the job for three weeks, she is beginning to feel very confused. The excitement
is over and she is not sure how to behave, how to feel. Cathy is particularly bothered by her new
role supervising her former colleagues, she feels isolated from them. The very people she's normally
leaned on for support are now the ones she's supposed to lead, evaluate, and even fire if need
be. This is her. Betwixt and between period, one that can last from a week to several years.
If she adjusts well, she will become used to her new role and its power and even come to enjoy it.
If she does not, she will suffer, lose confidence, become depressed, and perhaps seek another, less
stressful job. Whether the transition turns out for better or worse, it is still a slow process
during which roles, relationships, routines, and assumptions keep changing. The moving family
my own story relates to my husband's and my decision to invest our entire savings in purchasing an
elegant new apartment. But once I had moved in, I found myself feeling miserable and guilty. This
appeared to be an elected, highly desirable transition, but in fact the move triggered
tears instead of smiles. Our house needed extensive repairs and our son was a senior in high school
preparing to go to college. With a minimal amount of soul searching, my husband and I decided to
sell our home. Thrilled when we were quickly offered the asking price, we moved to an apartment
building that allowed dogs, and we proceeded to invest in extensive redesign and decoration.
Before moving in, we had three worries. Would we fit into the space? Would the renovations be
finished so we could move in? Would our son adjust? We felt we could handle anything. After all,
we had elected this transition, and we were copas. Complaints started the day we moved into the
apartment. Our dog, the construction, and our teenage son all became subjects of a neighbor's
gripes to the manager. Even though the best dog trainer in the city pronounced our dog normal and
the neighbors in need of training, I still felt guilty and anxious every time. I left the dog
alone in the apartment. Petty accusations increased. Our guests rang the wrong doorbell. Our son walked
through the lobby without a shirt. I felt I had been suddenly transformed from a desirable neighbor
into a briar. I did not want to move back to a big house, but I wondered if I could ever learn to
tolerate the condominium mentality. As time went on, I began to enjoy the condo and all its resources,
but even then it seemed that every time I relaxed, something else went wrong. I was amazed by the
amount of adjustment this elected transition required. One day I was in tears about the
move and my husband, Steve, said, You're the expert on transitions, so get out your model.
I thought, the system is for other people. It can't work for me. Then I realized that if I
was going to stand behind it, I had to apply it to myself. I assessed my situ or not. Tien, self,
supports and strategies and then looked to see whether I could either change these, change their
meaning, reduce the pressures or do nothing. Here's what I came up with. I realized I could
change the situation if I wanted to. If life got unbearable, we can move back to another house.
I also reminded myself that today is not forever and that my reactions would change over time.
Second, I looked at my external resources, especially supports, and realized that although
my general supports were good, a negative support system was operating in the apartment. I decided
to find at least two people with whom I could develop a good relationship. As I walked my dog
and swam in the pool, I finally met two women who were delighted to have us as neighbors. Next,
I analyzed my inner strengths, myself. The most important thing I realized was to stop blaming
myself and start thinking differently about the situation. Once I convinced myself that the
neighbors weren't right after all, then my guilt reaction was replaced by assertiveness. When the
next complaint came, I wrote back and said, I refuse the complaint. Furthermore, I have a
complaint to make. I feel we're being harassed. Post script, this process started with excitement
about the move. We then went through shock about the complaints, soul searching about whether we
had made the right decision and finally contentment with the move. Now I am delighted to live where we
do. Our son has moved to his own apartment nearby and I no longer care about complaints from
neighbors. Many who write about the transition process suggest that people go through sequentially
specific stages from beginning to end. In fact, they give labels to each stage. My research and
experience lead me to conclude that life is not that orderly. The labels don't work. What I have
found is the following. If the transition is major, if it has altered your roles, routines,
assumptions, and relationships, you will be consumed with it at the beginning, as we were.
Then you will experience a middle period during which you will learn the ropes but still feel
betwixt and between. Eventually you will incorporate the transition into your life, as we did. I rarely
think about the move now, although on occasion I miss the informal atmosphere of a house.
On balance I have concluded that the benefits of my new home outweigh the losses and I hope I have
learned that today is not forever. Reactions to good and bad transitions change over time,
and an important factor in approaching change is recognizing that we need time to adjust to them.
Approaching change, a perspective there are a number of assumptions embedded in this approach.
One is that transitions for me are either positive or negative, but if they have altered
your life in significant ways, you will need to cope. The more your life is altered, the more you
will have to bring your coping resources to bear on the change. Even if members of a group appear
to be in the same boat, as we saw with the job loss group, each has unique problems that require
unique solutions. This approach to life's transitions differs from the popular tests
or scales that assign a given number of stress points to various transitions. Those tests assume
the stress is inherent in the transition. In my system, however, I assume that what may appear
to be the same transition will alter different people's lives if or not. Currently, my system
helps you to identify and analyze both your own characteristics and those of the transition,
and to assess how much the transition has altered your roles, routines, relationships,
and assumptions. Approaching change requires knowing what change is, how you appraise it,
and how much it has altered your life. The next chapter describes the multiple types of change
you will encounter, an important aspect of approaching change. Transitions, they're infinite
variety to help in understanding transitions, we'll look next to their infinite variety.
Some are exciting, wonderful changes we never expected. Others we dream about for many years
before finally taking a plunge and making them happen. Still others are sad losses that,
expectedly or unexpectedly, alter our world. Since all of us dream of doing things that will
change our lives, let's start this section with a discussion of elected transitions, the ones we
choose. Elected transitions, many of the transitions in our lives are ones we initiate. We have been
brought up to expect, and elect, certain ones because they are major events in the lives of
most people in our society. These transitions are social milestones, such as graduating from high
school, moving away from home, getting your first real job, marrying, having a baby, retiring. Not
everyone chooses to experience all these transitions, but many people do, and there is strong social
pressure to do so. As transitions go, social milestones are somewhat cushioned for us in a
number of ways. Because these events are expected, we usually have a long time to think about them
and to plan and rehearse for them. And there is usually an abundant supply of role models to show
and tell us how to handle them. In addition, as we enter these transitions, we often get a helping
hand from members of our community who celebrate our change in status with us. Other changes involve
those that we initiate. These are individual choices that are outside the social timetable
and are therefore more idiosyncratic. Some of these choices, such as shifting jobs or moving,
are commonplace. They are generally socially condoned, as long as we don't hop around so often
that we seem inordinately restless or unstable. Other individual choices, such as separating from
a spouse, moving back into your parents' home, or changing religious affiliations, may even run
counter to the prevailing social norms. Nevertheless, we sometimes use such changes
when it looks as if they may somehow improve our lives or at least make them less difficult.
However important or positive such transitions may be for us, there's usually little social ritual
or celebration for most of them. They are largely private choices, typically shared with only close
family and intimate friends. Let's look more closely at examples of these two types of chosen
changes. Social milestones and individual choices. Social milestones, the fact that we've been raised
to expect to go through certain transitions in our lives, can prepare for them, and are likely to
have social support and approval when we choose them doesn't necessarily make them easy. And the
fact that these transitions are common doesn't mean that everyone experiences them in the same
ways. A few examples should make this very clear. High school graduation. Jane has just graduated
from high school. Graduation was an expected transition, and her school and family helped
her make plans to go to college after graduation. But she did not feel ready to grow up. In fact,
she stopped studying during her final semester, ending with a grade point average below C.
The admissions counselor, the only college that had accepted her call to say they needed to
rethink her admission. She wouldn't be allowed to start in the fall. Jane is betwixt and between.
She has left high school, but does not really know what is next. Most of her friends handled
this transition quite differently. They graduated with reasonably good grades, found summer jobs to
help pay for tuition, and despite some trepidation are looking forward to entering college in the
fall. For them, high school graduation is an exciting opportunity to take the next step in life.
But for Jane it is a threat. She resents being pressured to grow up and move out of her family's
home. Retirement. When we compared interviews with newly retired people and recent high school
graduates, we found that, despite the many different issues facing each group, both had
a strong sense of being betwixt and between. The retired group we interviewed consisted of partners
and their wives from a large company that required retirement at age 60, despite new
legislation eliminating age as a factor in retirement policies. During the two days we
spent with them, it was clear that they were now facing what they knew was inevitable, giving up.
An immensely important part of the life they had known and valued for many years.
We discussed how this expected transition was likely to change their lives. As one wife said,
I don't think Don realizes how important his relationships at work have been. What will he
substitute for them? One former partner who had retired two years earlier reported his surprise
and dismay when he returned to the firm to have lunch with an active partner and realized that
the partner viewed the occasion as a duty. For the retired partner, the biggest shift was the
transition from being needed, indeed, central to the success of the company, to being marginal,
even an annoyance. He hadn't yet found a new place to anchor his identity. Another former partner
felt quite different about his retirement. He had recently remarried and was thrilled at having much
more time to spend with his new wife, getting to know her family, and fashioning a new life with
her. Thus a social milestone, whether it is high school graduation. Retirement, or any other major
expected event, is intrinsically neither good nor bad. It marks the end of one episode of life and
the beginning of another. For those who focus on what is ending, it can be a threatening change.
For those who focus on it as a beginning, it is an opportunity to explore and conquer new worlds.
Individual choices Paul Gauguin abandoned his career as a Parisian stockbroker to devote himself
to being a painter in the idyllic setting of Tahiti. As he once wrote to his friend, Swedish
playwright August Stromburg, you suffer from your civilization. My barbarism is the mere renewal of
my youth. Why does Gauguin's story have such appeal? Maybe it touches our secret dreams of
starting out fresh. Almost all of us respond in some way to news stories of men and women who
shed their lovers and their jobs to take off in an entirely new direction. Few people actually
abandon all their ties to the past. But at certain points in life many people do choose new jobs,
new communities or new lovers. Let's consider a few examples of the kinds of individual choices
people make. Terry, from editor to entrepreneur. One day Terry, an editor in a publishing house,
sent a letter to one of his clients who was writing a book on midlife. Dear Jean, he wrote,
I have enjoyed working with you on the book. As you know, I think it is a real winner. In fact,
it is so good that I have taken it to heart than I'm writing to tell you that I have resigned from
the company. I am leaving publishing and I'm opening a boutique in Carmel. As I was working
on your manuscript, I kept thinking, what about my life? Is this really how I want to spend it?
Isn't there more to life than editing other people's manuscripts? As you can see, I decided
to give it a try and change gears. Thank you for inspiring me to take the leap and good luck to
you. Lisa, to Atlanta with love. I don't know how things turned out for Terry, but I do know
something about my friend Lisa, who also shifted gears but in a different way. Recently relocated
from Omaha to Atlanta, Georgia, Lisa had moved for several reasons. In general, she was ready
for a change, but she also wanted to be geographically closer to her lover of many years. She had also
found a good job there. In her new city she had already made sup not. Poor system of friends,
a house to move into and a high prestige job. Nonetheless, when we had lunch about a year after
her move, Lisa said she felt very confused and depressed. Since her relationship with her lover
and her job were both working out pretty well, she couldn't understand why she felt this way.
Lisa didn't realize that although the change she initiated was a positive one, it still required
many adjustments. Daily life with her lover, a challenging new job, and unfamiliarity. She had
been part of another world with set relationships, roles, routines, and assumptions. Now all these
were changed. She hadn't foreseen how long and confusing the betwixt and between period would be,
or how long it would take to learn the new rules and figure out where she fit in. We often think
these kinds of confusion and discomfort happen only in response to negative changes. But any
major transition, even the one we dream about and freely choose, is a process of adjustment. This
process includes an awkward period in which our old roles, routines, and assumptions are no longer
valid while the new ones are not yet in place. Surprise transitions. When the unexpected happens,
although many of the transitions in our lives are ones we initiate, there are many we can never
anticipate. In brief, they're surprises, both good and bad. Your closest friend is in a serious car
accident. You're fired, you make a killing in the stock market, you're passed over for a key
promotion. A major film studio buys the rights to your first novel. If the unexpected happens,
you're in for a surprise, and possibly a transition. Whether the surprise is terrible or delightful,
it can tax you emotionally and challenge your coping skills. Here are a few examples.
Dolores rejected after 35 years of marriage. Dolores's husband announced that he felt too
young to dry up, he had fallen in love and was leaving to join the new woman in his life.
What really stunned Dolores was that her husband had fallen in love with a woman his own age. She
couldn't even rationalize his behavior as one of those midlife May to December flings.
It completely knocked me off my pins, she said. After two years of depression, she decided to
return to school, where she is now getting a nursing degree. She is still angry and somewhat
depressed, but as she puts it, at least. I'm working on something. Bill's second chance Bill,
too, had been depressed for several years, but for a different reason. His 30-year marriage was
going strong, but he was very unhappy in his work life. He had taken early retirement from a high
level position in the United Nations, a job that required a great deal of political know-how and
made him feel useful and important. Knowing he was not ready to quit working, he had joined a small
consulting practice where his focus shifted from saving the world to getting clients.
He hated worrying about every billable breath, but he felt that at age 64, this was the best he
could do. He would come home at about 4.30 every day, putter, and watch TV. Bill told his wife he
felt like a has-been. Several friends suggested therapy, but he resisted. He was a classical
example of a man caught in an unsuccessful transition. One day, out of the blue, Bill was
offered a top position that enabled him to return to public service. He accepted it on the spot and
left the consulting firm. The new job, he says, is just what the doctor ordered. He has been
Although he now works 12-hour days and is on a gruelling travel schedule, he says,
I am the luckiest man in the world, at 64, to be given the chance to do an important job.
He had taken a risk, but he was ready for it. God willing, I plan to spend another 10
years at it, he says. Bill's story is unusual in several respects. First, a totally unexpected
opportunity made the real difference. Instead of spending the rest of his life in low gear,
he is on the road, growing and contributing. Second, since he had never adjusted well to
his consulting job, the shift back to a more familiar and congenial type of work was liberating,
True, his routines are disrupted by lots of travel, but his assumptions about himself are
unchanged and indeed reinforced by his new job. He is a man who loves public service and who also
has had the good fortune to find a second reward in career. Non-events, when the expected doesn't
happen we can be just as surprised when expected events don't happen as we are when unexpected
ones do happen. The expected ones that fail to materialise, called non-events, compact just as
powerful a wallop in our lives. One researcher, Janice Chiapone, has analysed how the non-event
of infertility affects couples who want and expect to have children.1 when they finally
realise that pregnancy will not occur, this non-event kicks off a transition. The researcher
found that the impact of infertility is much greater on the women than on the men, but once
the women accept the fact that they cannot have children, they begin to make different assumptions
about their relationships and roles, especially their work roles. For example, one woman in a
study had been coasting along on a series of low-level temporary jobs, but when medical tests
confirmed that she could not become pregnant, she began to make plans to return to school and
become a speech therapist. Harry, the chief who never was non-events in our lives are often more
difficult to handle than events are. They are usually not public, others can't see them, and
unlike many expected events, especially social milestones, there are rarely any rituals to help
us cope with them, for example, the realisation that one will never be promoted to a coveted
position. The work can alter a person's self-image and expectations for the future, yet one does not
announce this transition to the world or mark it with a ritual. Here's how one person reacted
to this non-event. Harry had been waiting for years for a promotion to bureau chief at his
newspaper. At first, he says, when I didn't get my promotion, I thought it was because I was so young.
As the years passed, I began to wonder, when, finally, at age 45, I came across an article
that explained that many organisations stopped promoting people after they turned 40, and I
suddenly realised that the answer to my question was, never. It was upsetting to realise that some
people defined me as too old, even though I felt no different from what I was like in the past.
I was not getting something I had always wanted. I blamed myself, and I blamed the system. After
wrestling for many months with his anger and frustration, Harry started to look for a new job,
but he found nothing better than the one he already had. He then set his sights on a new goal,
early retirement. Although he continued to perform his duties well, he stopped being a
workaholic and started to see himself as putting in time. Instead of working late and taking work
home on weekends, he started using his free time to explore investment opportunities and new career
paths that he might follow later. Harry's non-promotion was a classic non-event and
very painful at the time. But some non-events, like the one described below, are like a gift
from heaven. Melissa's gift of life Melissa was an active, vibrant woman who worked as a freelance
writer. Her work, though emotionally and financially rewarding, was isolating and hard. When she learned
she had a rare and fatal illness and had little time left to live, she gave up her career and
decided to spend her last months being close to her children, bravely preparing to die. But to
everyone's surprise and delight, Melissa's illness remitted, and she lived. Strangely, even this
almost miraculous turnabout was a transition and required a just. Meant, but she joyfully embraced
the non-event and returned to her work as a writer. This time, though, she was less compulsive about
work and built in more family time. Life on hold. The transition waiting to happen there's a special
type of situation that I call life on hold. It's a transition waiting to happen, poised between an
event and a non-event but really neither. For a variety of reasons, usually beyond your control,
you can't bring about the change you want. But you haven't given up on it either. A few examples
will show you what I mean. Ted on hold Ted had always dreamed of being a journalist. After
graduating from college, he landed a job as an editorial assistant at a national magazine.
But he soon discovered that he had become a glorified. Clark typist, and the job was a bore.
Although he was encouraged to write in his spare time and the magazine printed a number of his
short articles, Ted still felt that he was wasting his time doing other people's dog work, and that
his plan to work his way up the organizational ladder was not panning out. Staff turnover.
The magazine was rare, and he feared it would take forever to get a real writing position there.
Ted was raring to leave. When an exciting new magazine advertised for writers, Ted applied
immediately and got exactly the job he had wanted. He was to start in a month. But during that month
Strange physical symptoms and began a round of medical tests. No one could quite figure out
what was wrong. Some doctors suggested it was nerves, and others suggested a number of dire
possibilities. He started some treatments, but they only made him feel worse. By the time he was to
start the new job, he was embroiled. The medical tests with undefinitive results and lacked the
energy to take on the challenge of the new venture. Suddenly it wasn't so clear that he should leave
the old job for. The new one. Ted knew that he was valued in his old job and that he would have the
support of his boss and office friends even if he took a lot of sick leave. He also had health
insurance coverage for his mounting medical bills, but it wouldn't start the new job.
Until he had passed a three-month probationary period. It was a heartbreaking decision, but he
turned down the new job and put his career growth on hold. He decided to stay temporarily in his
outgrown position and concentrate on finding someone who could diagnose and treat his puzzling
disorder. The saga of slow Shep Vicki, like Ted, was working in her first job after college
graduation. She had found a dream position in a prestigious design studio and had taken it even
though it meant she'd be 300 miles away from Shep, her lover, who was completing his graduate work.
Since Shep had often talked about finding a job in her city after he got his degree,
Vicki initially expected that they'd be separated only a year until he graduated.
To overcome the strain of separation, Vicki and Shep called and wrote to each other regularly and
maintained a commuting romance. Many of their weekends together were spent at the weddings of
friends, who kidded them that they were next. They both felt a growing sense of commitment to
one another and that. Times talked about marriage, although they weren't engaged. But then one year
stretched to two, and although their relationship was clearly deepening, she began to worry that it
might never lead to a long-term commitment. When his dissertation was almost completed,
Shep announced that he was starting to look for jobs in other cities as well as in hers.
Vicki began to get angry. She felt it was time for them to live together and test their
relationship under conditions more normal than weekend trysts. Shep said he felt the same way,
but that he didn't want to confine his job search. To one city, when Vicki hinted that she'd give up
her job and relocate if that was the only way they could be together, he said he couldn't ask her to
do that, and it might not even be necessary if things work out right. Vicki feels caught in a
bind. She sensed that they're entering a crucial stage in their relationship, one that could well
end in marriage. Yet she is not sure that Shep is ready for the next step. She needs him to commit
himself to living with her wherever he whines. Up working, Vicki's life is on hold. She feels
too committed to Shep to date other people, but she cannot wait for him indefinitely, and she doesn't
want to resort to tricks to make him join her. She has decided to back off from the issue of
commitment and the crucial issue of the next step. There's a major transition in sight, but it's not
clear yet whether it's a breakup or an engagement. Sleeper transitions, many transitions have an
identifiable beginning point, such as a wedding, a move, or the death of a loved one. When they
start, we're well aware the change is on the way. But some transitions called sleepers start much
more softly and just creep up on us over time. It may be a gradual process of packing on pounds
or slipping deeper and deeper into drinking, smoking, or using drugs. Maybe it's a matter of
ignoring a worsening health problem or a pattern of increasingly slacking off at work or spending
more and more time away from the family. We don't consciously choose to do these things, but they
can and often do change our lives eventually just as if we had. At some point we realise that there's
been a big change for the worse. We have arrived at the point where our roles, relationships, and
routines have all been altered. Yet in this case, our assumptions have failed to keep pace. A similar
but more constructive kind of sleeper transition can bring us equally unaware to a new place in
our lives. Perhaps you've been growing and developing on the job, becoming more skilled
and confident. You may be finding work increasingly unchallenging and boring but haven't given any
thought to other career opportunities. Or perhaps you've become more worldly, interested in new
foods, books, ideas, or friends while you're apart. Enner is stuck in a narrow sphere of
interests and aspirations. Many people find it hard to imagine that over the years they have
grown apart from someone they love. At times, constructive and destructive sleeper transitions
happen together. Frustration with a relationship or a job we have unwittingly outgrown may contribute
to avoidance or to sliding into harmful habits as a way of coping. Being utterly absorbed in an
avocation we love may lead us to ignore many other commitments. Obligations and relationships, even
our health. Sleeper transitions of both types are tricky because we are usually in the midst of them
before we recognize them. Even if you're growing, if you don't recognize the changes taking place
and they're leaving you out of sync with your existing world, you can be in a very precarious
position. By the time you realize how much you've changed, your behavior may already have kicked
off a chain of events that precipitates an unexpected major transition. Here's the story
of Dan, a friend who told me about his experience of waking up just in time to take advantage of a
sleeper. Sleeper Dan, he was a much-valued technician in a biology laboratory, a man whose
magic solutions for thorny technical problems had earned him the nickname Doctor Fix-It. He enjoyed
his work and his excellent reputation, but over the years Dan found himself increasingly absorbed
in his weekend avocation, hand crafting stained glass. He had started by making little window
hangings and had progressed to more ambitious and time-consuming projects such as elaborate
decorations for Victorian doorways. He entered a few craft shows, sold a few pieces and started to
receive commissions, first from friends and then from strangers who had seen and admired his
craftsmanship. Dan found himself designing projects and sketching whenever he had a spare moment,
even at his regular job. But one day a bad evaluation by his supervisor made Dan realize
that his heart was no longer in the lab, but in his home studio. With a wife and young son to
support, Dan had never considered his stained glass project. ECTS is more than a hobby, but the
shock of the poor job evaluation made him look more carefully at how his time and energy were
invested, and he realized that he would like to evoke all his energy to working with the stained
glass. To his surprise, when he shared his dreams with his wife, Bev, she was very supportive. After
taking a business course for artists and craftsmen, he saw that with careful planning, hard work, and
a little luck, he might be able to shift careers and still make ends meet, barely. Together, Dan
and Bev developed their five-year plan, he would set up a formal business and try to establish
himself as a professional craftsman while continuing in the lab. Bev would serve as his
business manager and publicist. In a year or two, if the business seemed to be taking hold, he'd try
to shift to doing the stained glass work on a part-time basis, and a few years later, he would
finally work on the stained glass full-time. Once their son was a little older, Bev would return to
work to help finance the business. With this plan and goal in mind, Dan was able to keep his two
work worlds separate. He went to his job in the lab with new energy and enthusiasm, and his work
improved. Double whammies. It never rains, but it pours, although the case examples I've given on
the preceding pages are drawn from real life, you may have noticed something unreal about them. For
the most part, they sound as if people deal with a single transition at a time, even a single type
of transition. But, we all know it never seems to happen that way really. Events and non-events
never seem to come in single file. You might elect a transition, look forward to it, and then all of
a sudden things begin to fall apart all around you. You're going to have a baby, and then your
husband tells you he has just lost his job. You just moved in with a lover, and you discover that
your mother, in failing health, wants to move in with you. Events in one area of your life trickle
or tumble into other areas, and each one makes managing the others somewhat more difficult.
At times it feels as if the stars must be out of joint. Surprises spring up, all unconnected,
but all disruptive. At other times the transitions are part of a chain reaction in which one
transition sets off a host of others. I call these pileups of related or unrelated trend not.
Sessions double w-hammies. Sometimes one event sets off a chain reaction, and your life feels
like one crisis after another. Trouble erupts at every turn, for you and for everyone around you.
Fortunately, for most people, these situations are fairly rare. Tough as they are to weather,
most people manage to get through them. As the old saying goes, when the going gets tough,
it doesn't take a string of catastrophes to add up to an overload of transitions.
Even a run of good but disruptive transitions can bring an exit in headaches and more.
Here are a few examples of the way some transitions compile up at difficult times in our
lives. Unretiring Ben, the story of Ben, a man in his 60s, makes it clear that transitions often
come in sets and can ricochet in unexpected directions. Ben began, well in advance, to make
plans for his mandatory retirement from his company. He had no control over his timing,
but because it was expected, he had time to prepare for it. He returned to graduate school
to study accounting. As he says, my strategy was to get into something new and leave the old
com not completely behind. I resolved not to be a hang around, not to keep going back to the old
outfit. Although older than many of the other students, Ben made friends easily and even
started a support group for incoming students in the program. The first he was excited about
preparing for a second career, but the school transition unexpectedly triggered some upsetting
family transitions. His wife, Ava, became increasingly critical of the fact that Ben
was a student and no longer producing income. Somehow this unleashed mutual hostility that
had been pent up for years. They decided to separate, but to maximize their financial
situation, they lived separate lives in the same house until Ben received his degree and got a job.
Later, Ben and Ava divorced, and not long afterward he remarried. The multiple transitions in Ben's
life seemed to start with just one, retirement. That prompted a return to school, followed by
marital problems, eventually followed by a new job, a divorce, and remarriage. Ben's story
illustrates the reality that transitions rarely happen singly. Rather, one elected transition can
lead to an unexpected one, and then a whole train of other transitions may follow. Mary, Caud's
in the middle Mary is a middle-aged graduate student whose recent life is a study in transitions.
Before she had a chance to grieve for the deaths of both her parents, her aged in-laws decided it
was time to move to a nursing home. Because her husband, the breadwinner, couldn't afford to take
leave from his job, she commuted out of town regularly to help his parents plan their move.
At the same time, Mary's daughter, unable to afford her own apartment, moved back home,
and her son and daughter-in-law had a baby. Just as he lost his job, to an outsider, Mary's situation
was obviously overloaded with transitions. Yet she was so unaware of the cumulative impact of these
changes in her life that she could not understand why it was so hard to complete her graduate degree.
Because our lives are often intertwined with other people's, our own lives may change when people
closed us under no major transitions. Mary's life had become a perfect example of what sociologist
Gunnhild Hagestart calls, counter-transitions, too. Everything that happened to her was the result of
other people's transitions. The nature of transitions, transition events, and non-events that
change our lives come in many sizes, types, and combinations. But it is not the actual event.
Or non-event that is most critical, with understanding how, and how much, these changes
alter our lives, and what we can do about coping with them. In part two we will look at ways to
analyze transitions more effectively and to understand the personal attitudes and characteristics
that we bring to them. Types of transitions. A summary elected. Some are social milestones.
Others are individual choices. Graduating from school, moving away from home, changing jobs,
having a baby, retiring, moving, divorcing, becoming a grandparent surprises. When the
unexpected happens, car accident, winning the lottery. Death of a child, plant closing,
getting a raise and non-events. When the expected doesn't happen, infertility, the promotion that
doesn't occur, the book that is never published. Transitions. Their infinite variety. The fatal
illness that disappears, the child who never leaves home life on hold. The transition waiting
to happen. The long engagement. Waiting to die. Hoping to become pregnant. Waiting for Mr. Onward's
right sleeper transitions. You don't know when they started. Becoming fat or thin. Falling in love.
Becoming bored at work double whammies. It never ends but it pours. Retiring and losing a spouse.
Marrying. Becoming a stepparent. And being promoted to first supervisory job. Having a baby.
Developing a serious illness. Getting a new job. Caring for ill children and parents at the same
time and many others. Part taking stock some of us breeze through what others may find a tragedy.
Some feel panicked and lost even when the dream, a move to a new house, marriage to the perfect mate,
landing the job they've always wanted, is suddenly coming true. Because each of us has a
different personality and because every transition has its own special meaning for each, there's no
simple slogan or formula for coping that can be used universally. The next three chapters will offer
some guidelines on how you can assess any transition that confronts you. By taking stock of the four
S's, as outlined in these chapters, you will build a foundation of understanding, both of the nature
of transitions and of your own reactions to them, that is essential to achieving the goal
of mastering change. In chapter three you'll learn how to take stock of your situation. In chapter four,
of yourself and supports, your inner resources and the friends, family, and other individuals and
institutions on whom you can rely for help. And in chapter five, of your strategies, what skills you
have or can learn that can help you cope more effectively. Taking stock of your situation, all
of us approach change with potential resources for managing change. What I call the four S's,
your overall situation, yourself, your supports, your strategies for coping by taking readings on
the state of these resources, you can assess how well equipped you are to deal with the transition
in question. For example, most people move a number of times in their lives. Sometimes they
cope well, other times they manage only with great difficulty. The reason, their situation, self,
supports, and coping strategies differ with each move. Taking stock with these four S's will give
you a reading of your potential resources for managing change. This chapter will guide you in
assessing one of your four S's, your situation. When you think back on all the transitions that
you have made in your lifetime, you can probably remember some that you handled rather well and
others that you handled less smoothly and with less satisfactory results. Since you are the same
person, it may be puzzling that you could have pulled through one change like a trooper and yet
floundered in the face of other, apparently less severe changes. In chapter two, one described
different types of transition events and non-events, showing that some are anticipated and planned for,
while others are unexpected and catch us by surprise. Some alter our lives dramatically,
others do not. To understand your own situation, it helps to identify your transition and try to
attach one. Of those labels did, but in order to take some of them and seek out your transition,
I suggest going beyond the label and asking yourself a series of questions. How do you evaluate
the transition? How has the transition, irrespective of type, changed your life, now and in the future?
What are some of the characteristics of your particular transition in terms of your planning
for it? Its timing in your life, your control of it, your previous experience with similar transitions,
its permanence, and the presence of other stresses in your life? Your answers to these questions will
differ with each of your tran not. Cisions. Some transitions you will evaluate as negative,
others as positive, and many as a mixture. Some transitions will change your life in every regard,
others in more limited ways. And some you will be able to plan for and control, but others will seem
overwhelming and out of your control. Some will occur at a bad time in your life and add a burden
to the stresses you already have, while others will add zest and sparkle to your life. In this
chapter we will review a list of factors that you must assess, consciously or unconsciously,
when you take stock of your situation, your evaluation of the transition. How the transition
has changed your life, its impact, the transition's characteristics, your evaluation of the transition
individuals appraise similar situations in different ways. As demonstrated by the truism
about a glass of water, some of us are innately more optimistic than others. An optimist is likely
to see the glass as half full, while the pessimist will describe it as half empty. The metaphor can
be applied to the way you view life in general. But although one tendency may dominate, most people
swerve in an hour of optimism depending on the situation. Though a particular kind of change may
seem only negative, it is impossible to make assumptions about how people will react to it.
In our study of job loss, most subjects saw the change very negatively. However, one nurseryman
reported that he didn't care about losing his job because he felt sure he could get a job some not
place else. Another person who saw opportunity rather than disaster was a top executive.
This is great, he said. I am so bored with my job, my wife, my life. This gives me the excuse I
needed. I'm leaving everything and moving across country. A famous line from Shakespeare's Hamlet
is illuminating. There is nothing either good or bad, but thinking makes it so. In other words,
to one person a serious illness can be the devastating last straw that destroys hope. But
to another, it can present a challenge to take control and beat the illness down. Some researchers
have addressed this idea that how people view transitions affects their ability to cope with them.
In a study of college students, for example, several psychologists found that the student's
assessment of their own competence to handle exams was a better predictor of achievement than
grade point average or SAT scores.1.1. Participant in a study about women's friendships reported
that she was distraught about a rift that she felt was killing a 35-year-old friendship. By
talking through the situation with her therapist and reading books on women's friendships, she
began to see that she was in the midst of a shifting relationship, not a final rift. She
reevaluated her situation from negative to okay. This modification enabled her to cope with the
changing relationship. Psychologist Richard Lazarus contends that individuals are constantly asking
the question, is it good, bad or neutral, not just about the transition itself but also about
their own resources for coping with it. What I call their 4S is 0.2 for our life hour. Resources
change, prompting us to reevaluate our situation. This book will show you how to shift the balance
of your resources when they're needed to cope effectively. When that occurs, your evaluation
of your transition can change. The bottom line is this, your evaluation of a transition is the most
critical aspect of how you handle it. You are more likely to embrace the change if you see it as one
for the better or simply as neutral than if you see it as negative. How the transition has changed
your life we must be cautious about judging the severity of an event simply by labelling it. A
transition that is severe for one person may be relatively minor for another, depending on the
degree to which it alters the person's roles, relationships, routines and assumptions. Change
in roles and relationships all of us enact many roles in life. We are friends, parents, children,
co-workers, employees, employers, neighbours, students, teachers and much more, depending on
the circumstances. And in each of these roles, we have particular relationships with our family and
others around us. As I discussed in chapter 1, some transitions are minor and alter these roles
and relationships insignificantly, while others are major and alter them in major ways. Examples
of transitions that can change our roles and relationships significantly include divorce,
having a child or a grandchild, seeing our children grow up and leave home, moving into a better job
or losing a job, graduating from college or undertaking a new career in middle age. A divorce
means that we lose a partnership and the role of spouse, and it can also mean that we lose neighbours
and sometimes friends. The same is true when we lose a job. When we change jobs and are required
to make a move, we lose neighbours and friends and perhaps group membership, but we gain a new role
in the workforce. In analysing a transition, it is useful to delineate the role changes. Which are
gains and which are losses, even if we gain new roles in the course of a change, the more roles
that are altered, the more we have to adapt. We must remember that with role changes come changes
in routines, in relationships and in assumptions. Changes in routines some of us do not realise the
importance of routines in our daily life until they're changed or eliminated. Even minor routines,
taking a coffee break with a co-worker who is a valued friend or watching the news every night
at seven o'clock, provide us with an important measure of serenity, solace and comfort. In one
case, a widow and mother of three children married a man with three children of his own. She expected
difficult role changes, especially when the whole family moved into her house. She acquired not only
a husband and a larger family but the role of stepparent, which brought with it a changed
relationship with her former in-laws and a new relationship with her new in-laws. She had expected
to undergo some difficulty with her role changes, but the additional difficulties of adjusting to
new daily routines came as a surprise. All the logistical and mechanical issues of daily life,
who makes the beds, who washes the dishes, who drives the carpool, who shops and cooks,
suddenly had to be renegotiated. In another case, a woman and her children moved in with her new
husband and his children. As the husband said, the forks and knives were no longer in their right
place. It took a while to get used to all the changes. Some people regard changes in routine as
positive. For example, one writer who moved from New York City to France basked in her change of
routine. She says, I found it easier to change almost everything at once, where I lived, what I
ate, how I exercised, my work routine, when I went to France. Sometimes I have felt jarred when my
routines change, but because I was seeking change, this time it was exhilarating. This writer's
experience underscores the point that the amount of role or routine change is not the primary factor
in how we weather a transition. It is how we evaluate it. Changes in your definition of yourself
I often need workshops on transition. In these, I ask the participants what changes are the most
difficult. The answer is often the same, events that change one's definitions of oneself are the
most difficult to endure. One participant recognized that her problem is common to many women. She held
an important job, but she was frightened by the responsibility. It took about one year for her to
realize that she could not only do the job but do it well. She began to define herself as someone
who is comfortable with being in con not troll. In another, less happy case, a man who lost his job
and cannot find another began to see himself as worthless and therefore unemployable. Transition
characteristics as you evaluate your transition, you will define it in terms of whether you can
plan for it in this timing in your life, the degree to which you can control it, whether it is
fleeting or permanent, and how it fits into the rest of your life. Your ability to plan if you can
anticipate a change, you can rehearse for it mentally, and often that makes the change easier.
One woman rehearsed her departure from her husband for three years. She knew exactly what she was
going to do on the day that she left, so that when the time came, the inevitably painful transition
was somewhat less anguishing. My colleagues and I are just beginning a study of men and women
executives as they leave their jobs.3. We are learning that one major difference in people's
ability to cope is the degree to which the leaving is voluntary and planned. Leave taking is often
difficult, but when you can plan for it and rehearse for it, it is easier. It is this notion
that has prompted many companies and organizations to start pre-retirement planning programs.
Timing the timing of a change is often as critical to your reaction as the type of change.
Does the event come at a particularly difficult time in your life? Two men recovering from open
heart surgery may have very different reactions to the operation and different levels of optimism
about recuperation. One, for example, may be in physical pain, but he may believe he is facing a
bright future with a loving partner and a secure job. The other may have been abandoned by his wife,
or his child may have been diagnosed with a severe illness, or he could be jobless. He will find it
harder to dream of a better day. Other examples of built-in timing problems include events such
as a family move during the summer before a child's senior year of high school, a company layoff just
before the employee's pension rights are vested, and the diagnosis of a serious illness in one
partner of a couple about to marry. These are unfortunately timed. Changes can double their
normal impact, making it far more difficult for an individual to go through a change. Of course,
a change can also occur when it is expected, or at an unexpected but ideal moment, making it much
easier to cope. One 45-year-old woman wanted to move to New York to work for many years, but she
feared that because of her age and her relatively provincial background, no one would hire her. But
with perfect timing, she was offered a fantastic job in New York just as her youngest child was
going to college. In spite of her nerve-wracking adjustments to combine a serious career change and
a dramatic move, she was able to face these more easily with her nest empty. In analyzing a
transition, it is also important to consider another kind of timing, the timing within the
transition process itself. As discussed in chapter 1, each transition is like a journey, with a
beginning, a middle, and an end. At the beginning you think constantly of the change. The middle
period is one of disruption, when you find yourself at sea. Old norms and relationships
are letting go, and new ones are not yet in place. In the final period, you begin to fit the transition
into the pattern of your life. Control of the transition transitions that are forced on us are
far more difficult to manage than those we make by choice. In our study of men whose jobs were
eliminated, one theme emerged. They were as concerned about their lack of control over the
job loss as over the actual loss itself. One man told me that he felt the experience had been the
most difficult in his life.Four family members may be affected in very different ways by a change in
the job status of one person in a family. One psychiatrist has written about the trauma experienced
by women who are asked to follow their successful husbands around the country as the husbands change
jobs.5 such moves for a promotion demand very different coping strengths in a family. The spouse
who is being promoted has elected the change and is often excited and happy about the move. The spouse
who follows feels forced into it by the need to keep the family together. This follower often feels
depressed and unsettled, leaving friends, routine, and a familiar home. Children in such a family have
different responses, depending on their situation, support, self, and strategies. Grandparents may
feel very sad about losing an entire family. If invited to join the move, they might feel powerless.
If not invited, they might feel deserted. We can, however, generalize that the more you feel you
can control the situation, the more likely you'll be able to manage it than to reduce the toll it
takes on you. Previous experience drawing on your previous experience of similar transitions can help
you get through one that's facing you now. The trick is to turn what you learned before into a
positive experience, rather than a negative one. It is true that previous experience can determine
what follows. Consider the example of two people who are facing surgery. On the basis of previous
experience, one patient may be able to focus on the anticipated surgery, rehearse for it, and prepare
by recalling the factors that gave him or her control and comfort during past surgeries. Another
patient may feel terrified because of previous negative experiences. For this patient, the key
might be to identify what made the previous experience negative, a dislike for a particular
hospital or doctor, for instance, and try to determine how those factors can be avoided or
ameliorated the second time. Similarly, some families in the armed services or the foreign
service say that they get used to resettling and even thrive on the experience by viewing the move
in terms of the challenge of meeting new friends and becoming part of a new culture and lifestyle.
Yet for other families, the stress of such moves can add up until finally someone says,
I've had it. Never again. Previous experience is an important factor in coping, but only the
individual involved can determine whether it is a plus or minus. The permanence of the transition
may regard a permanent change differently from one that we think of as temporary. It is easier
to endure even very painful transits if we know that they won't last so long. For example, although
no one looks forward to surgery, a brief stay in the hospital for minor operation is easier to cope
with than a diagnosis of a lifelong disability. A man may agree to move to another city so that
his wife can enrol in a two-year training program, but only on condition that the move is temporary.
He may need to be reassured that they will return to their home community when her training is
completed. On the other hand, it feels good when something that is going well is seen as permanent.
When interviewed by a television correspondent on 60 Minutes, the new head of Disney Productions
said he loved his life at that moment, his family, his job, his money, and he wished that it could
last forever. The rest of your life, none of us leads a static life. Our lives are changing
constantly, and the same transition may influence you differently under different end circumstances.
The other stresses in your life influence how you handle a particular transition. Consider the story
of Julia, a clerical worker. She underwent a major transition in her life, her husband's loss of his
job. When she described this event to me, it became clear that she and her family were already
deluged with stress. Her daughter Joan had been living with heart disease. Joan was president of
her school class and an active skier and tennis player, and the family had to believe that the
teenager's case was exceptional, that she would recover. Yet at almost the same time that her
father lost his job, Joan suffered a serious relapse and was hospitalized. This forced the
family to face the prognosis that the youngster's life really was at stake. Earlier that year,
Julia's father had undergone eye surgery, and her mother-in-law had died recently.
I feel like a multiple problem family, said Julia. The family felt stretched to its limits.
Any one of these transitions, all undeniably negative and unchosen, could reduce one's ability
to cope. Bunched together, this set of changes all but incapacitated this family. Some changes,
even elected changes, can be disruptive. For many people, coping with lots of changes at once can
cause stress. Whether you evaluate lots of changes stressful or not, it does require an ability to
choose from and sometimes to use lots of strategies. To understand how an individual approaches and
responds to a particular transition, it is necessary to look at a range of factors that
add up to the context of the person's entire life. Summarizing your situation as you think about
making a change or weathering an existing one, you can ask yourself a series of questions about
your situation, yourself or inner strengths, your supports, and your coping strategies.
In this chapter we have focus on your situation. Is this situation good or bad from your point of
view? Is it positive or negative? Is it expected or unexpected? Does the transition come at the
worst possible time or the best? Is it a move up or a move down? Where are you in the transition
process? At the beginning, the middle, or the end? When confronted with a transition, especially an
unexpected or undesired one, it is easy to view a situation as irrevocable or permanent. Yet as we
have seen in this chapter, analyzing a transition systematically shows that each one is different,
that some are more significant than others, and that any irrevocability may be more deeply rooted
in our own psychological makeup than in reality. You can improve your ability to cope with
transitions by learning how to measure the impact of a particular change, by placing it on a
continuum of time and seriousness, by examining the effects it has had on your roles, routines,
and relationships, and by becoming more aware of the effect of your own personality on how you
view the situation. Before going on to look at two other crucial lessons, yourself and your supports,
you can review this approach to analyzing your situation by filling out the chart entitled,
Your Situation Review. Your situation review, did the situation change your roles? Yes no
relationships, yes no routines, yes no assumptions. Yes no, were you able to plan for the transition
in advance? Yes no control the transition, yes no benefit from previous experience, yes no,
was it a good time in your life? Yes no, were there many other stresses in your life? Yes number.
Did you evaluate your situation as yes no positive, yes no negative, yes no okay, yes no taking
everything into account. Do you feel your situation is a high resource, yes no a low resource, yes no
a mixed bag, yes no okay, yes number. Taking stock of yourself and your supports in the last chapter,
we learned how to take stock of the situation surrounding a transition. This chapter will help
you take stock of two more crucial factors, your inner strength or yourself and the supports that
surround you. When you complete this chapter and the next one, which will help you identify your
potential coping strategies, you will have gained more knowledge of your own resources for coping,
of the areas in which you are weak and of some ways you can shore them up. Yourself we all bring
many personal resources to our transitions. Some of these, like financial assets, are tangible.
Others, like personality or outlook, are less obvious but just as important. What do you bring
of yourself to the many transitions you face? When you try to answer that question, you get into the
interesting but challenging task of defining who you are. We have all heard people say you would
really like Jane. She has a wonderful personality. What does that mean? Does it mean that Jane has
traits that are considered good in our culture or group? Does it mean that Jane handles life
with ease? Does it mean that she has a way of looking at things that make her a pleasure to be
with these? Questions show that the process of understanding ourselves and what we bring to a
transition is a complex one. Yet we all know that a person's behaviour and outlook are very critical
to managing change. Different ways to look at Steve, the case of Steve, the president of a
medium-sized organisation, may help us understand different ways of assessing what inner strengths
we can bring to managing change. Steve had a good income, good health and many friends. He was
married to his college sweetheart. He felt on top of the world, but that world shattered when Steve
and his vice president had a falling out over the direction the company should take. The rift became
so serious that the board decided that one of them had to leave. After a long political struggle,
Steve was asked to resign. He felt crushed. At 58, he felt too old to go looking for another job.
Soon after, his wife died of a heart attack. Steve had to face two transitions so potentially
devastating that each alone would have exaggerated his fears of aging and loneliness. After several
years of struggling, Steve is now working at a new job he created in a social service agency. He has
met new people and has developed some very close relationships. Many of Steve's friends attribute
his eventual triumph over two difficult transitions to his inner strengths and resources. Since we
cannot touch or see someone's inner resources, let us examine Steve's case to help us understand
how we can actually take stock of our inner resources. In doing so, we can draw on the work
of a number of Cynot, psychologists and researchers who have devoted their careers to this problem.
Some would say that Steve has a hardy personality that enables him to take stock and take charge of
his life. Others would point to his resilience and flexibility, which are invaluable in enabling
someone to bounce back and change course. Others would point to Steve's wisdom, perspective, and
humor, all strengths that can be significant in dealing with life. The question hotly debated in
the field of adult development is whether these characteristics are inborn, genetic, or learned.
I purposely am not entering that debate in this book, but regardless of whether these are innate
or learned qualities, it is my conviction that all of us can increase our coping strategies,
thereby becoming more flexible and resilient. As we will see in Chapter 5, the person who uses
many strategies flexibly is the one who masters change. I believe we can learn how to increase
our coping repertoire and build on what we already have. The fighting spirit is another label that
might be applied to Steve by a psychologist who has studied women with breast cancer.1 in the study
she identified five types of people according to how they responded to the illness. A follow-up
study showed that the fighting spirits, those with the will to fight, struggle and resist, and the
deniers, those who refused to recognize the reality of the situation, had less recurrence
of the disease. The other three types, the stoics, who submitted without complaint to
unavoidable life circumstances, the helpless persons, who felt unable to cope without the
help of others, and the magical thinkers, who believed the help would come through mysterious
and unexplained powers, all have higher recurrence rates. Another way to take stock of yourself and
your in-resources is by identifying the degree to which you feel good about yourself.
Walt Gracebrook, Rosalind Barnett, and Carol Rivers have called the sense of well-being. In their
study of 300 women, they tried to determine the factors contributing to well-being. Some of the
women they study had never married, others were married without children, some were married with
children, and others were divorced with children. The authors found that those who put energy into
several areas of their lives, such as work and family, were more satisfied than those who put
all their eggs into only one basket, such as work or family. The ability to invest in several
aspects of life results in a sense of mastery, a feeling of being important and worthwhile, and
finding life enjoyable. Two of the authors concluded that the combination of mastery and
pleasure is what generates a sense of well-being. In the case of Steve, we can assume that he was
overwhelmed. The first because his sense of well-being had been totally disrupted. His
balance of mastery and pleasure was shaken, but because of who he is, Steve was able to take on
this challenge and once again gain control and balance in his personal and work life.
When you're in transition, you often feel helpless. A partner leaves you, your plant closes,
birthdays keep accumulating, you choose to move to a new city. Many people experience these events
as overwhelming. Are you the kind of person who usually gives up, or do you meet the challenge
head on and try to take control? Psychologist Martin Seligman's work has focused on different
ways people react, especially to negative, uncontrollable, or bad events. According to
Seligman, those who feel they have control over their lives, or who feel optimistic about their
own power to control at least some portions of their lives, tend to experience less. Depression
and achieve more at school or work, they're even in better health. Seligman suggests that the
individual's explanatory style, the way a person thinks about the event or transition, can explain
how some people weather transitions without becoming depressed or giving up. Since many
transitions are neither bad nor good, but a mixture, a person's explanatory style becomes the critical
key to coping. A person with a positive explanatory style is an optimist, while one with a negative
style is basically a pessimist.3 for example. We can ask how Steve explained what happened to him.
Did he blame himself and say he lost out on the job? Because he was inadequate. Did he conclude
that he would always be inadequate at work? People who blame themselves for everything that happens
and then generalize to think they always screw things up, have a good chance of being depressed
and passive. On the other hand, Steve saw that he clearly had some role in the job. Decision in that,
in general, he handles complex situations well. He thus had a good chance of coming out on top
in a transitional situation. Steve's success in managing and weathering his transition suggests
that he is probably an optimist and that his explanatory style is positive. Seligman and
a colleague also suggest that a person's explanatory style can predict his or her success on a job.
In a study of insurance salespersons, those representatives with a positive explanatory style
were twice as likely as those with a negative style to be still on the job after a year.
Following up on this study, a special force of 100 representatives who had failed the
insurance industry test but who had a positive explanatory style were hired. They were much more
successful than the pessimists.4. Another way to take stock of personal resources is to use
personality tests such as the Myers-Briggs type indicator. This test, developed by Isabelle Myers
and Catherine Briggs, is based on Jung's descriptions of different personality types.
This easy-to-score, easy-to-take personality test gives someone an indication of how he or
she habitually views life and its problems and makes decisions about how to handle them.5.
Some of us navigate through life by using intuition, and others navigate by using senses
like eyes and ears to uncover the facts in a realistic way. Some people make decisions in a
logical, systematic way. Others do so by feeling what seems right. People can be differentiated
along these dimensions. It may be helpful for you to try to determine how you and your family or
acquaintance stand to function based on these criteria. Recognizing that your type might be
different from that of your partner, boss, or friend may help you understand, for example,
why you work well with one colleague and conflict with another. It could be a simple matter of
different ways of understanding and approaching the world. A.C. not. Knowledgeing these differences
can be helpful in building collaboration rather than conflict. I have used words like stress,
transition, and coping. These words are used by psychologists in many different ways. Some define
stress as an outside stimulus, others define it as a response to stimulus. Others, like Richard
Lazarus, define stress as a particular relationship between the person and the environment that is
appraised by the person as taxing or exceeding his or her resources and endangering his or her
well-being. Six others who face major transitions, those that change many roles, routines,
relationships, and assumptions, as Steve did may be challenged by them. According to Lowenthal and
Chiriboga, Steve, who faced a very stressful set of transitions, was nevertheless challenged rather
than overwhelmed. It is the interaction of the situation and the self that explains reactions
to Transition Point 7 to summarize, to take stock of yourself and your inner resources. You can ask
yourself some questions. Are you generally challenged or overwhelmed by transition events
which kinds of stress challenge you overwhelm you do you generally approach transitions as a
fighting spirit a stoic a denier a helpless person or a believer in magic do you generally feel a
sense of control or mastery as you face transitions do you usually balance mastery and pleasure do
you usually face life as an optimist or pessimist do you know yourself your supports no matter how
strong our resources are they are often not enough to guarantee that we can cope with the transition
successfully most of us need the support of others to help us i understand this better now than i did
when i was trying to be supportive to steve who had lost both his job and his wife in a short
period of time as i look back on what happened to him i wonder how i could have been so matter
of fact about his transcei not tians of course i was sympathetic and made the appropriate number
of visits and phone calls but i know now that i did not feel what must have been the depth of
his loss i did not realize that the loss of support and intimacy coupled with his fear
of diminishing options because of his sex and age made him feel that he had lost everything that had
given meaning to his life another person who came to realize the importance of support is pat whose
transition began when her good friend had a stroke at the age of 40 pat began to think if my friend
is incapacity tated it could happen to me or my husband if something happened to my husband i am
not prepared to support my family of six children around the same time pat's interest was piqued by
a newspaper ad for a woman's external degree program since the program required only occasional
weekends on campus she began to think that it might be possible for her to complete the degree
she had begun years ago and to prepare herself to be self-supporting pat's husband bob was very
supportive when they talked about the idea of her returning to school but when she did it the reality
that pat was actually gone for three days at a time every six weeks irritated bob and he began
to complain and even ridicule her but pat was so determined to complete the degree that she asked
her mother to move in during the times she was away although bob's support was eroding the support
of her mother and of the program made up for her husband's ambivalence pat's case demonstrates that
even when people are in fairly stable relationships we cannot assume that those close to them will be
totally supportive if they only go a transition in into not views about support we now ask in what
ways is x supportive of you or your activities in what ways if any does x subvert or sabotage your
activities what we find is the support is often a double-edged sword in many instances support is
given in exchange for some measure of control the unwritten statement is i'll support you but you
need to behave as i think you should some people give support but in a way that is not helpful
one woman wrote in a paper for one of my classes my boyfriend of five years told me he was one
step away from being in love with another woman this called into question all past assumptions i
had about our relationship i began to doubt myself when we asked for help her cope she said professional
counseling when asked if she had tried methods that were unhelpful she replied simply talking
with friends they could not understand they were too biased their reactions ranged from pity for me
to total anger although my friends meant well they were ineffective this is a case where friends did
not get the kind of support that she felt she needed we can probably all agree that we all need
support but this is a very general concept as a way to get a handle on it i will describe what it
is and where it comes from and then show you how to visualize your own support as you move through
tackle face or master your transitions support what it is we all have a visceral sense of what
the word support means of what we seek from friends relatives church neighbors co-workers
or even strangers with understanding the functions of support why it is important to us is a bit more
complicated psychologist george caplan defines support systems as ways to help individuals
mobilize their resources to master change by sharing tasks and providing extra supplies of
money materials tools skills and by giving guidance about ways to improve coping point 8
robert kahn and tony antinucci have identified three key functions of support effect affirmation
and 8.9 let's look at what they mean effect an expression that someone respects likes or loves
you affirmation an expression that someone agrees that what you have done is appropriate or
understandable assistance or aid an expression that someone will actually supply you with chicken
soup information time or whatever tangible help is necessary to get you over the crisis where it
comes from people receive affect affirmation and aid in many ways from many sources sometimes they
receive support from friends but in other instances it comes from a professional people
can potentially get support from many sources intimates families friends strangers and institutions
however there are many times when these sources of support are not helpful you the person in
transition need to evaluate what kind of support you need affect affirmation aid and from what
source you could receive it friend partner stranger or institution do you need support from one
constant source or would it help to have the comfort of a group of people who face similar
problems today many people join self-help groups where they both give and receive support
intimates we often stole the virtues of an intimate relationship but sometimes the person
with whom we are most intimate cannot be our best support the men whose jobs were eliminated for
example resisted going to their wives mostly because they felt guilty about inflicting this
transition on their families in one x0 treme case a man actually dressed and pretended to go to work
his wife didn't discover this until the unemployment checks began to arrive despite these examples most
research confirms the importance of having an intimate someone with whom to share honestly
and openly or in a world intimates are extremely important they're not in transitions intimate
support comes in several packages the intimacy you can achieve with friends who are often part
of your adult life the intimacy you can achieve with your spouse or partner and the more permanent
intimacy you get from parents siblings and children family family can be a key source
for giving and receiving affect affirmation assistance and at times honest feedback in most
of our lives the forever relationships are intergenerational between grandparents parents
and children without wanting to glorify these relationships because they like all others are
fraught with ambivalence and stress as well as sup not port we realize that they're central to
well-being as we live longer an increasing number of us continue to be part of four or five generation
families as sociologist haggard start observes these family patterns unprecedented in human history
have in a way taken us society by surprise families today may have to sort out who gives help and
support to when two generations face aging problems point 101 woman was just about to
retire when her mother became depressed and moved in with her the daughter was not happy about the
prospect of spending her retirement years with her mother since they had always been frictioned
between them but she says although she might have been aggravated she wasn't lonely most studies
show that adult children stay in touch with their aging parents and their family members constitute
the greatest sources of assistance to one another friends support from friends lovers and partners
also helps buffer stress but the type of support they provide may differ from that provided by the
family as lillian rubin found in her study of friendships friends help in the lifelong process
of self-development often becoming people who join us in journey toward maturity who facilitate
our separation from the family and encourage our developing individuality thus she points out one
of the most valued gifts friends offer us is a reflection of the self we most want to be in the
family it's different there it's our former selves that are entrenched in both the family's
vision and our own rubin points to the changing functions and roles of friends and asserts that
it is important to have a number of different types of intimates she had found from countless
interviews that even when people are comfortably and happily married the absence of friends exacts
are heavy cost in loneliness and isolation 11 strangers when rodney the community organizer
found he had cancer he fought it with all the energy he could muster he went to the best doctors
and even became part of a research experiment but he went through physical and mental agony his wife
an adult children were totally supportive and he also benefited from the support of a set of very
close friends who had known the family since college days at the time of his diagnosis rodney
was negotiating a major grant from a foundation when the foundation learned that he had cancer
the negotiations fell apart the feeling that he would now have to face a financial crisis on
top of a life-threatening disease devastated rodney he explained the situation to his doctor a
relative stranger who wrote a letter to the foundation explaining the circumstances of
rodney's disease and suggesting that the foundation would be discriminating if it did not provide the
funds as a result of the letter the foundation's decision was reversed and rodney received the
grant this case illustrates the necessity of having access to a variety of types of support
support from intimates from friends and from strangers a professional woman who lives in
washington ec went to denver to make a speech when she arrived at the hotel where the meeting was
scheduled she learned that she was one month early unable to comprehend that she had done this she
was momentarily very upset to compensate she decided to treat herself to a lovely lunch at one of the
best restaurants in town the maitre d was friendly and the woman found herself telling him about her
terrible error he laughed and told her about a mistake he had made this interchange with a stranger
and by the time lunch was over she have regained her humor and perspective institutions and
organizations one woman describes how she coped with widowhood not only was the transition off
time but it was unanticipated and outside my control so there was a high degree of stress this
was balanced by an environment of tremendous social support from family friends and my department at
work i could not have survived without the constant telephone calls concern and continuous offers of
help i was surprised at my initiative in creating a support group of single women to share common
concerns 12 many people do not have the energy to create a new ad hoc special support group
fortunately many existing organizations are already available to support us in times of
change there are many single purpose organizations such as alcoholics anonymous a where alcoholics
offer advice and strength to others the idea behind our has been expanded to other special
purpose organizations such as gamblers anonymous overeaters anonymous and i am sure many more such
groups other single purpose groups have sprung up these include parents without partners caretakers
of those with Alzheimer's disease and parents of disabled children including those with learning
disabilities mental illness and physical illness more general institutions such as family services
red cross travelers aid and the various social welfare and counseling arms of religious ethnic
and national groups then of course there are a host of organizations created to deal with the
special problems of women hispanics blacks immigrants the foreign bomb gays and other
segments of the population that have not been getting their share of support from the society
in addition there are organizations such as unions and professional business and trade groups
and last but certainly not least are the churches that offer formal services in addition to the
tremendous resource of the people power of fellow congregants who can and do become helpers at least
the support networks and intimate relationships available to us depend on many factors where we
live our age our economic status our own personality some research suggests that sex is a particularly
important determinant of the composition of one's network of supports this stems from the changing
sex ratio over the course of life men and women live in somewhat different worlds although more
boys are born than girls by the time people are in their mid-30s there are more women than men this
imbalance has resulted in remarriage becoming a disproportionately male experience after age 40
by the time people in their 80s there are more than twice as many women as men thus the majority
of older women are widowed and have a social life with other women while most older men are married
and have a social life with couples the types of supports we need and can offer may change depending
on our age and circumstances the demographics of age and sex may impinge on our ability to get the
type of supports we need at the time we need them haggis dad's interviews with grandnot parents
middle-aged men and women and their adult children suggest that men's ups and downs are tied more
often to the world of work and politics while women's are related more to events in the family
further she found that when men get together they talk about work education money and social issues
while women focus more on interpersonal relations and family point one three support for supporter
often we forget that a person who is giving support to a friend or family member in need may also
require some support to help shoulder the additional burden we can see this in the case of Sarah who
confided to her brother Mark that she was having her second abortion and swore him to secrecy Mark
became Sarah's rock through the trauma although it was extremely difficult for him since his
political and philosophical views about the morality of abortion reigned flux at the time
of Sarah's confidence because Mark loved Sarah he stuck by her and didn't tell her about his own
changing views in addition he couldn't confide in any of his friends about the stress of being
Sarah's supporter because this was Sarah's secret Mark was helping Sarah to cope but he needed
support so that he could continue being the supporter another example is Adele a woman whose
best friend's baby died Adele s role was coordinating the funeral and friends visits she reported that
she had no time to mourn the loss herself and felt very stressed by her coordinating role she too felt
the need for tender loving care to summarize we all need support and can get it from many types of
people friends family colleagues neighbors parents and children but because life is by
definition a series of transitions for all of us the specific individuals with whom we have
supportive relationships changes life unfolds and the options for relationships also change we also
require different types of support at different times a way to visualize the range of your supports
Khan and Antonucci have developed a way for you to identify your potential supports by drawing a
series of concentric circles figure four to one your convoy of social support source based on work
over the life course attachment roles and social support by R.L. Khan and T.C. Antonucci in lifespan
development and behavior edited by P.B. Baltes and O.C. Brim Jr. New York academic press 1980 page
273 reprinted by permission with you at the center see figure four to one the circle closest to you
contains your closest most intimate friends and family who are presumably part of your life forever
the next circle is the family friends and neighbors who are important in your life but
not in the intimate way the first group is the circle farthest away from you represents more
institutional supports Khan and Antonucci call these circles and individuals convoy of social
support which he or she carries through life point one for actually mapping out your supports
in concentric circles in this method enables you to see how much a transition interrupts or
increases your support system for example geographical moves can interrupt relationships
between husbands and wives spouses who do not want to move but who agree to do so for the sake of the
family may harbor deep resentment and anger thus a wife who follows her husband may have had him in
the center of her life before the move but she may shift him to one of the more disnot tanned
circles after it in a contrasting case a new college administrator reports that his wife is
delighted with their move back to Washington DC because she lived there before and has a large
support network in the city if we were to compare her concentric circles before and after the move
her husband's place would be the same in the closest circle other examples can be readily
found by looking at what happens to people support systems before and after retirement
if a newly retired couple moves away from many supports to a place with none the transition
may be very difficult if however retire not meant liberates one of the spouses to move back to an
area where there are intimate relatives and friends then it might be a much easier transition
this system of concentric circles shows that the most important aspect of a transition may
not be the change itself but what it does to the individuals convoy in summary to take stock of
your supports you can ask yourself am i getting what i need for this transition in terms of
affect affirmation aid do i have a range of types of support spouse or partner other close family
or friends co-workers colleagues neighbors organizations strangers and institutions has
my support system or convoy of social support been interrupted by this transition do i feel my support
system for this transition is a low or a high resource putting it together the case of david
a top administrator in the state highway patrol illustrates the importance of taking stock of the
three factors we have been discussing in this part of the book your situation your in resources or
self and your supports after 27 years in the state highway patrol david decided to return to school
to earn a degree that would enable him to become a teacher when he retired full of enthusiasm he
enrolled in a state university to all appearances david was a responsible dedicated professional
who had identified teaching as a means of making the transition to a second career in his retirement
years yet two years and a lot of hard work later he dropped out of school without finishing the
requirements for the degree i feel disappointment some resentment and at times anger he said after
the experience i usually achieve what i start out to achieve what went wrong david thought he had
accumulated enough credits to graduate by taking courses at the university and by enrolling in a
program designed to evaluate prior experience and if appropriate award credit the process of applying
for such credit is complicated and requires the learner to develop a detailed portfolio of each
experience david applied for his b.a degree only to discover that although he have enough credits
many were from community college courses and he did not have enough from the university when he
realized that he still needed 60 more credits that had to be taken on the campus david became
infuriated and dropped out of school in order to understand what happened let's take stock of
david's situation self and supports in the next chapter we can take stock of his strategies
taking stock of david's situation there were many pluses in david's situation the transition was one
he had elected and he was beginning to see himself as someone who could make his career dreams come
true on the negative side were his changed routines requiring that he drive 90 miles each way twice a
week he had to think through his plans for each week and find time to study as well as to work and
be with his family david felt that his family was getting the short end of the stick but overall he
was pleased about the transition to learn and evaluated it very positively taking stock of
david's self david describes himself as a hard worker a go-getter he classifies himself as a
fighting spirit and an optimist but he adds if things don't go the way i think they should i can
fly off the handle maybe i am a little short on patience so david may be his own best and worst
resource he fights for he wants and believes in but he may give up if the odds seem unfavorable
taking stock of david's supports david assesses his family's supporters terrific his wife took on
additional family responsibilities so that he could give his all to getting his degree he also
feels positively about his co-workers support some tease him about going to school but mostly
they thought it was great he was getting a good supply of affect a fur not mation and aid david's
downfall was his perceived lack of institutional support he claims he never received information
about the credit limitations from outside institutions the dean claims that david was
informed but was so eager that he didn't pay attention to advice to slow down whatever the
facts there was clearly a break not down in communication a breakdown that prompted david
to leave in some david's situation self and supports all had positive and negative aspects
by taking stock of the situation self and supports of david and others described in
these two chapters we have illustrated two crucial insights into the transition process
